Introduce EventCounters overview article and tutorial doc (#19635)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/diagnostics/event-counter-perf.md

---
title: Measure performance using EventCounters in .NET Core
description: Installing and using the dotnet-trace command-line tool.
ms.date: 07/22/2020
---

# Tutorial: Measure performance using EventCounters in .NET Core

**This article applies to: ✔️** .NET Core 3.0 SDK and later versions

> While an <xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventSource> is fast, logging too many events for frequent events is still a performance consideration. In this tutorial, you'll learn how an <xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventCounter> can be used to measure performance of a high frequency of events.

Reviewer: This text assumes customers are thinking "I am logging so many EventSource events that performance is bad, how can I go faster?" My educated guess is that this is not the frame of reference most customers would relate to and instead the common mental frames will be:
a)  I would like to monitor .NET built-in metrics for my app, similar to what I could with PerfMon. How can I do that?
b) I would like to add my own metrics and monitor them, how can I do that?

For the first case a tutorial like the first part of [this one](https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/blob/master/documentation/tutorial/app_is_leaking_memory_eventual_crash.md) might be more useful.
For the second one that could be this doc, but I suggest rephrasing the intro and switch from PerfView to dotnet-counters.

Reviewer: @IEvangelist - I noticed you had been doing some minor tweaking of the wording which wasn't what I had expected. I was thinking to delete line 11-15 inclusive and replace it with a new intro that matches up better with the frame of reference I expect customers looking at this page would have.
I wasn't sure if you were making different changes because you disagreed with my suggestion above (which is fine and I'd be glad to talk about) or I just didn't do a good job explaining.

For events that happen every few milliseconds, you'll want the performance per event to be low (less than a millisecond). Otherwise, it is going to cost a significant performance overhead. Logging an event means you're going to write something to disk. If the disk is not fast enough, you will lose events. You need a solution other than logging the event itself.

When dealing with a large number of events, knowing the measure per event is not useful either. Most of the time all you need is just some statistics out of it. So you could crank the statistics within the process itself and then write an event once in a while to report the statistics, that's what <xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventCounter> will do. Let's take a look at an example how to do this in <xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventSource?displayProperty=fullName>.

```csharp
// Give your event sources a descriptive name using the EventSourceAttribute, otherwise the name of the class is used.
[EventSource(Name = "Samples-EventCounterDemos-Minimal")]
public sealed class MinimalEventCounterSource : EventSource
{
    // Define the singleton instance of the event source

>     public static MinimalEventCounterSource Log = new MinimalEventCounterSource();

Reviewer 2: Some code outside the class may be able to set `Log` to null. I think the code can be more robust.

>     private EventCounter RequestCounter;

Reviewer 2: `_requestCounter`?

>     private MinimalEventCounterSource() : base(EventSourceSettings.EtwSelfDescribingEventFormat)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    private MinimalEventCounterSource()
```

    {
        RequestCounter = new EventCounter("request", this);
    }

    // Indicate that a request for a URL was made which took a particular amount of time
    public void Request(string url, float elapsedMSec)
    {
        // Notes:
        //   1. the event ID passed to WriteEvent (1) corresponds to the (implied) event ID
        //      assigned to this method. The event ID could have been explicitly declared
        //      using an EventAttribute for this method
        //   2. Each counter supports a single float value, so conceptually it maps to a single
        //      measurement in the code.
        //   3. You don't have to have log with WriteEvent if you don't think you will ever care about details
        //       of individual requests (that counter data is sufficient).

        // This logs it to the event stream if events are on.
        WriteEvent(1, url, elapsedMSec);
        // This adds it to the PerfCounter called 'Request' if PerfCounters are on

>         RequestCounter.WriteMetric(elapsedMSec);

Reviewer: Assuming we reframe the problem statement as "How do I log some metrics?" instead of "How do I optimize my event collection?" then we could get rid of the WriteEvent(...) portion entirely and the big comment.

Author: I opted to leave the `WriteEvent` as it's the only place we show the correlation of writing a metric and event together. All the comments have been removed.

    }
}
```

The <xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventSource.WriteEvent%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> line is the <xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventSource> part and is not part of <xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventCounter>, it was written to show that you can log a message together with the event counter.

You logged the metric to the <xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventCounter>, but unless you can actually get the statistics out of it, it is not useful. To get the statistics, you need to enable the <xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventCounter> by creating a timer that fires as frequently as you want the events, as well as a listener to capture the events. To do that, you can use PerfView.

> There is an extra keyword that you will need to turn on the EventCounters.

Reviewer: I'd recommend doing the demo in dotnet-counters so that it will work cross-platform. A major part of the value proposition for EventCounters is that it would be available xplat, so demoing it in a Windows-only tool may create confusion. I also wouldn't expect PerfView to be a primary tool for analyzing counter data in the long-run, it just happens to be the only tool that existed at the time this sample was first written.

> There is an extra keyword that you will need to specify the turn on the EventCounters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is an extra keyword that you will need to turn on the EventCounters.
```

```
PerfView /onlyProviders=*Samples-EventCounterDemos-Minimal:EventCounterIntervalSec=1 collect
```

> > [!IMPORTANT]

Reviewer 3: Does this need to be called out as **Important**?

> The `EventCounterIntervalSec` segment is used to indicate the frequency of the sampling.

> As usual, turn on PerfView, and then run the sample code - we get have something like this.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Turn on PerfView, and then run the sample code - we get have something like this.
```

What sample code do we run or how do we run it? the preceding sample doesn't have a Main method.

> :::image type="content" source="media/perfview-counters.png" lightbox="media/perfview-counters.png" alt-text="PerfView of EventCounter traces":::

Reviewer 3: This image and the following ones in this doc won't load in staging.

Author: I noticed that too, but intermittently - in fact, after a hard refresh they were all working... but then they were again flakey later on, I'm not sure what is going on.

> Now let's drill into what the data captured means - when I copied from PerfView, it looks like this

Reviewer 3: Avoid first person

```suggestion
Examine the captured data. When you copy from PerfView, it looks like this:
```

```
ThreadID="17,800" ProcessorNumber="5" Payload="{ Name:"request", Mean:142.0735, StandardDeviation:42.07355, Count:2, Min:100, Max:184.1471, IntervalSec:1.000588 }"
```

> Now it is obvious that within a sampling period, we have nine events, and all the other statistics.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Within a sampling period, there are nine events and all the other statistics.
```

I don't see nine events, I do see 7 properties in the payload -- is that "all the other statistics"?

> Notice that this command also logs the events, so we will get both the events and the counter statistics.

Reviewer 3: Does it log the events or retrieve the logs of the events?

:::image type="content" source="media/perfview-events.png" lightbox="media/perfview-events.png" alt-text="PerfView of event traces":::

As we mentioned, to avoid overhead, sometimes we will want just the counters. This command can be used to log _only_ the counters:

```
PerfView /onlyProviders=*Samples-EventCounterDemos-Minimal:*:Critical:EventCounterIntervalSec=1 collect
```

> [!TIP]
> The `Critical` keyword is used to filter out the other events with lower priorities.

> In the next release of PerfView (> 2.0.26), we can visualize the counters using PerfView. To do so, you can right-click on the event like this and choose the show event counter graph item:

Reviewer 3: "next release" -- docs are supposed to avoid talking about future features ... unless "next" actually refers to something available now.

                context.HttpContext.Request.GetDisplayUrl(), _stopwatch.ElapsedMilliseconds);
        }
    }
}
```

The action filter starts a <xref:System.Diagnostics.Stopwatch> as the request begins, and stops after it has completed, capturing the elapsed time. The total milliseconds is logged to the `MinimalEventCounterSource` singleton instance. In order for this filter to be applied, you need to add it to the filters collection. In the *Startup.cs* file, update the `ConfigureServices` method in include this filter.

```csharp
public void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection services) =>
    services.AddControllers(options => options.Filters.Add<LogRequestTimeFilterAttribute>())
            .AddNewtonsoftJson();
```

## Monitor event counter

You logged the metric to the <xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventCounter>, but unless you access the statistics from of it, it is not useful. To get the statistics, you need to enable the <xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventCounter> by creating a timer that fires as frequently as you want the events, as well as a listener to capture the events. To do that, you can use [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md).

> Use the [dotnet-counters ps](dotnet-counters.md#dotnet-counters-ps) command, to display a list of .NET processes that can be monitored.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use the [dotnet-counters ps](dotnet-counters.md#dotnet-counters-ps) command to display a list of .NET processes that can be monitored.
```

```console

> dotnet-counters ps

Reviewer 3: This command won't show anything because the app isn't running -- the directions had us run and stop it.

Reviewer 3: Also should clarify if you have to run it using dotnet run, otherwise if you run it with VS you don't get a dotnet process, you get iisexpress. In that case you'll need two command prompts open.

```

Using the process identifier from the output of the `dotnet-counters ps` command, you can start monitoring the event counter with the following `dotnet-counters monitor` command:

```console

> dotnet-counters monitor --process-id 2196 —providers Sample.EventCounter.Minimal Microsoft.AspNetCore.Hosting[total-requests,requests-per-second] System.Runtime[cpu-usage]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
dotnet-counters monitor --process-id 2196 --providers Sample.EventCounter.Minimal Microsoft.AspNetCore.Hosting[total-requests,requests-per-second] System.Runtime[cpu-usage]
```

```

> While the `dotnet-counters monitor` command is running, hold <kbd>F5</kbd> on the browser to start issues continuous requests to the `https://localhost:5001/api/values` endpoint.

Reviewer 3: There was no instruction to open the browser yet.  

Given that this is an asp.net example in a non-asp.net doc set, might be a good idea to include instructions on how to deal with dev cert / say go past browser warning-- I think Rick may have an include file for that or text you can copy/paste.

```console
Press p to pause, r to resume, q to quit.
    Status: Running

[Microsoft.AspNetCore.Hosting]
    Request Rate / 1 sec                               9
    Total Requests                                   134
[System.Runtime]
    CPU Usage (%)                                     13
[Sample.EventCounter.Minimal]

>     Request Processing Time (ms)                      34.5

Reviewer 3: FYI, I don't see these numbers ever going above zero.

Author: Do you have the console open monitoring it, and a browser open - that is constantly being refreshed?

Reviewer 3: yes. holding down f5 didn't cause repeating refreshes so I pressed the key as rapidly as I could.  The other numbers reflected the activity but not these.

```

> The `dotnet-counters monitor` command is great for active monitoring, however; you may want to collect these diagnostic metrics for post processing and analysis. For that, use the `dotnet-counters collect` command. The `collect` switch command is similar to the `monitor` command, but accepts a few additional parameters. You can specify the desired output file name, and format. For a JSON file named *diagnostics.json* use the following command:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `dotnet-counters monitor` command is great for active monitoring. However, you may want to collect these diagnostic metrics for post processing and analysis. For that, use the `dotnet-counters collect` command. The `collect` switch command is similar to the `monitor` command, but accepts a few additional parameters. You can specify the desired output file name and format. For a JSON file named *diagnostics.json* use the following command:
```

```console

> dotnet-counters collect --process-id 2196 --format json -o diagnostics.json —providers Sample.EventCounter.Minimal Microsoft.AspNetCore.Hosting[total-requests,requests-per-second] System.Runtime[cpu-usage]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
dotnet-counters collect --process-id 2196 --format json -o diagnostics.json --providers Sample.EventCounter.Minimal Microsoft.AspNetCore.Hosting[total-requests,requests-per-second] System.Runtime[cpu-usage]
```

```

> Again, while the command is running, hold <kbd>F5</kbd> on the browser to start issues continuous requests to the `https://localhost:5001/api/values` endpoint. After a few seconds stop. The *diagnostics.json* file is written.

Reviewer 3: You have to press q in the cmd window to write the file.

> ```json

Reviewer 3: This is extremely long; you could consider abbreviating it and adding a comment to that effect.

Also, the json file I got was not indented.

---
title: Measure performance using EventCounters in .NET Core

> description: Installing and using the dotnet-trace command-line tool.

Reviewer: copy/paste error?

Author: Yes, still working on updating this.
